[HN Story: Feminist video-games talk pulled after massacre threat - 149pts, 323 comments]

TOP COMMENTS:

[0] idlewords: Before this was cancelled, Utah State University police announced "enhanced security measures will now be in place, which include prohibiting backpacks and any large bags." But anyone who had a permit to carry a concealed firearm would be allowed to bring it to the venue. I guess the th...

[0] kmfrk: Yep; it was not the massacre threat but the refusal to deny concealed carry that prompted Anita to cancel her event. The title implies a wrong causality like that. I can't imagine attending an event where people could carry concealed weapon, even as completely average dude.

[0] pjc50: Apparently Utah law would make it illegal for them to prevent people from bringing concealed firearms, which is basically a law to maximise casualties from campus shootings.

[0] anon3d3c928: GamerGate is very probably a hate group, with no other legitimate purpose. they're known to send people into forums like this to argue politely and coherently...

[0] vlunkr: I don't understand these people that hate her so much, even if you disagree with her. All she has done is create a series of videos pointing out what she thinks is wrong with the gaming industry and she gets death threats.

[0] mturmon: Her video series, which you can see on YouTube, is actually quite good and well-researched. You might disagree with her conclusions but even if you disagree, you have to admit she's done a lot of legwork.

[0] hnha: She is cherry picking examples, sometimes twisting the truth so it fits her agenda. See the Hitman example where she portrays violence against women as integral part of the game while you are in fact punished by the game for doing so.

[0] Karunamon: but in reality it seems to have largely become corrupted by misogyny... I would liken them more to the vandals that presented themselves during Occupy Wall Street.

[0] caycep: She committed the "sin" of pointing out misogyny in the video gaming products and community, it seems. It riled up a few folks in 4chan and apparently Adam Baldwin who are taking malicious glee in some astroturfing campaign to essentially ruin her life.

[0] marknutter: These days isn't receiving death threats on the internet kind of par for the course? How many internet death threats have actually resulted in deaths? I think the answer is zero.

[0] archagon: Not only do these women receive orders of magnitude more death threats than your typical online celebrity, but people do in fact come to their homes, contact their relatives, harass them at work, mail them stuff, etc.

[0] tedks: Patriarchy means women's lives are worth less than men's lives. White supremacy means a black person's life is worth less than a white person's life. Homophobia means a queer person's life is worth less than a straight person's life.

[0] grecy: So where are the police in all of this? Are you telling me I can send an email threatening mass murder to whomever I want and there are no consequences.

[0] ceejayoz: Naturally, the appropriate reaction to that is death threats. (edit: Sorry, unclear. Not accusing the parent of this opinion.)

[0] rubix117: I disagree. Her videos have been shown to cherry pick. She is also a liar and has no interest in video gaming. This has been shown in older videos of herself. Its a money making scam.
